2D Convolution Benchmark Explanation

Purpose

This benchmark simulates a simple 3×3 convolution, one of the most
common operations used in image processing and Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs). The objective is not to produce meaningful image
values, but to generate a realistic memory access pattern for evaluating
cache performance.

Unlike the previous synthetic benchmarks (streaming, conflict, random,
etc.), this benchmark resembles a real application.

Overall Idea

A 3×3 convolution places a small 3×3 window over an image. For each
output pixel, the program reads the nine neighbouring input values,
combines them, stores one output value, and then moves the window to the
next position.

Since neighbouring pixels are accessed repeatedly, cache behavior has a
strong impact on performance.

Benchmark Versions

Row-major version

The program processes one row at a time.

Pseudo-code:

for each row: for each column: compute convolution

This accesses consecutive memory addresses and therefore has good
spatial locality. It is expected to generate fewer cache misses and
achieve a higher IPC.

Column-major version

The program processes one column at a time.

Pseudo-code:

for each column: for each row: compute convolution

This repeatedly jumps between rows in memory, reducing spatial locality.
It is expected to produce more cache misses and a lower IPC.

Step-by-step execution

Step 1 Reserve memory for the input image and the output image.

Step 2 Initialize registers that store the base addresses and loop
counters.

Step 3 Start the outer loop.

Step 4 Start the inner loop.

Step 5 Compute the memory address of the current pixel.

Step 6 Load the nine neighbouring values using LW instructions.

These load instructions generate the cache accesses measured during the
experiments.

Step 7 Add the loaded values together.

The arithmetic itself is not important; the important part is the memory
access pattern.

Step 8 Store the result using an SW instruction.

This also exercises the write path of the data cache.

Step 9 Move to the next pixel.

The row-major version advances across columns first.

The column-major version advances across rows first.

This is the only difference between the two programs, but it produces a
very different cache behavior.

Step 10 Repeat until every output pixel has been processed.

Why this benchmark is useful

This benchmark allows us to evaluate cache size, block size, and
associativity using a realistic workload.

Because both versions perform the same computation but traverse memory
differently, any difference in IPC is mainly caused by cache performance
rather than computation.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------

To evaluate a more realistic application, we implemented the same 2D convolution algorithm in two different versions: 
row-major and column-major. Both programs perform exactly the same computation and produce the same output, but they access
 memory in a different order. In the row-major version, the image is processed one row at a time, accessing consecutive memory
  locations. This improves spatial locality because several neighboring values are loaded together into the cache. In the 
  column-major version, the image is processed one column at a time, causing the program to jump between memory locations that 
  are farther apart. As a result, the cache cannot reuse data as efficiently, leading to more cache misses.

The purpose of separating the two implementations is to isolate the effect of the memory access pattern. Since the computation 
itself remains identical, any differences in IPC or cache performance can be attributed to the way memory is accessed rather than 
to changes in the algorithm. This allows us to study how cache parameters such as cache size, block size, and associativity influence
 the performance of a realistic workload, which is exactly the type of analysis required for the second phase of the project.
